====================
O.1.4 Release Notes
====================

New features
============

Updates to existing ontologies
-------------------------------

Brain Modeling Ontology
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Added :code:`RNA Sequencing Profile` (a subclass of :code:`Dataset`).
- Added :code:`Neuron Molecular Type`.
- Renamed :code:`Neuron Transcriptomic Type` to :code:`Neuron Transcriptome Type`.
- Added :code:`Neurotransmitter Type` and its subclasses: :code:`Excitatory Neuron`, :code:`Inhibitory Neuron` and :code:`Modulatory Neuron`.
- Added :code:`Interneuron` (a subclass of :code:`Neuron`).


Molecular Systems Ontology
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
- Relabeled :code:`Complex` to :code:`ProteinComplex`
- Changed URIs:

     - :code:`https://neuroshapes.org/Metabolite`to :code:`https://bbp.epfl.ch/ontologies/core/molecular-systems/Metabolite`
     - :code:`https://neuroshapes.org/Complex` to :code:`https://bbp.epfl.ch/ontologies/core/molecular-systems/ProteinComplex`
     - :code:`https://neuroshapes.org/Protein` to :code:`https://bbp.epfl.ch/ontologies/core/molecular-systems/Protein`

- Removed :code:`prov:Entity` and made all its children to be the top-level classes (previous structure introduced inconsistency with BMO).


Cell Morphological Types Ontology
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Removed :code:`defines` relations (from the ontology to classes).
- Added BMO-like high-level structure (:code:`Entity/Biological Brain Component/Brain Cell` and :code:`Entity/Brain Component Type/Brain Cell Type` according to the requirements of Atlas to have a single root node).
- Added some "non-morphological" cell types for the purposes of Atlas (:code:`Entity/Biological Brain Component/Brain Cell/Glia/..` and :code:`Entity/Brain Component Type/Brain Cell Type/Neuron Type/Neurotransmitter Type/...`).


Organismal Species/Strain Ontology
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Moved :code:`Species` under :code:`prov:Entity` to be consistent with the other ontologies.
- Relabeled :code:`Class`, :code:`Species` under :code:`Taxonomic Rank` into :code:`Class Rank`, :code:`Species Rank` not to confuse with :code:`Species` representing a set of real species.
- Added a link from BMO to this ontology through :code:`(Species)-[:isDefinedBy]->(Organismal Species/Strain Ontology)`.


New ontologies
-----------------

Morphological Feature Ontology
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This specialized ontology (:code:`ontologies/bbp/mfeatures.ttl`) catalogues morphological features used at the BBP to characterize brain cells. Individual classes correspond to features extracted by NeuronM https://neurom.readthedocs.io/en/stable/ (for example, number of bifurcations, section lengths and so on).


Cell Morpho-Electric Types
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This specialized ontology (:code:`ontologies/bbp/metypes.ttl`) provides a classification of all cell types according to the combinations of their morphological types and their electrical behaviour as described in `Markram, 2015 <https://www.cell.com/fulltext/S0092-8674(15)01191-5>`_ (for example, L1_HAC_cNAC, L23_MC_cAC).

Updates on CI/CD
-----------------

Added new CI steps
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Added new pipeline step for deploying ontodocs in production when tagged
- Added new pipeline step for generating and deploying :code:`Sphinx` documentation both on staging and production environments

Modified documentation generation process
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The documentation generation process was moved from a multi-stage Dockerfile to a separate CI step. This change was applied due to several issues of Kaniko on multi-stage docker builds.

The generated documents are stored in a Gitlab artifact and then picked from the deployment step based on where they are supposed to be deployed.